Cameron Kull & Marie Williams
Final Project: Milestone 1


For our final project, we plan to create an interactive news article exploring how tuitions of American universities have changed, relative to the average American salary, over the past few decades. We intend to create two main visualizations. The first will provide a bigger picture view of how these two numbers have changed over time, likely through a histogram chart representing average income with a line chart representing average tuition laid on top. We aim to capture how tuition has grown to capture a greater percentage of average income, and we plan to show how this fraction varies across different types of universities (private, public, for profit, nonprofit), giving users the option to filter to their liking. Users will also be allowed to toggle between two views; one will represent currency in 2021-2022 dollars, while the other will represent costs/incomes in nominal dollar values. We will be using datasets from the National Center for Educational Statistics and the United States Census Bureau.
        Our second visualization will provide a closer look at the median parental income for students of Ivy League Universities. This may not seem as directly related to our first visualization, but the overarching theme of the article is that higher education, especially at the elite level, is becoming increasingly inaccessible to lower income families, who have less access to opportunities that help their child in the college application process and feel a larger burden from the tuition costs. This is reflected both in the relationship between average income and average university tuition, as well as the proportion of Ivy League parents with incomes in the top percentiles. We have two ideas for how we could represent this information. In the first case, we could break down the proportion of parents that fall into income quantiles at each respective Ivy League university, likely through some sort of histogram chart. Users would select certain institutions in the Ivy League to see the breakdown. Alternatively, we could represent all the Ivies at once and have users filter by certain parental income criteria, like “belonging to the 1%” to see how the universities rank in terms of the proportion of their students who have parents that fall into this category. In both cases we would likely add some hovering features to aid the user in learning more details. The source data for this visualization is from Opportunity Insights, a more specific study conducted in 2017 by Raj Chetty, John Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner and Danny Yagan for The Equality of Opportunity Project.